
Survival tips:
--------------
> Eat and drink to keep  your  strength up. This will  also  help  restore  hit
hit points if low. Generally check your strength and energy after  each  battle
and before you  leave the  game (if you are leaving  while  in  the dungeon). A
victory in battle will restore some HPs while running away or fleeing will not.
Fleeing also  will  reduce one of  your attributes.
> Examine all suspicious  objects. This will raise your IQ if you successfully
examine a cursed object. While  picking up a cursed object will reduce your IQ.
> If you  leave your  character in  the dungeon, and  do  not  wish to  have it
dueled, move it away from the shoppe in the first level! Find some quiet corner
to hide  out. Also, leaving a  friendly QUOTE may help.
> If  possible,  carry a 'Transport  to shoppe' spell.
> If you always miss a certain monster, chances are, a special weapon is needed
for that monster (ie, the silver bullet for the Werewolf). Attacking  with  any
other weapon is just wasting your time.
> The Dwarf always resides in one  spot on level  number 1. He  will  sometimes
steal your gold as long as he is  still in that spot. The spot will not  change
from game to game, so explore level  #1 until you find him. He is pretty tough,
but when you bump him off, you not only are rid of him for the rest of the game
but you get ALL the gold he has  stolen from all players since the last time he
was bumped off.
> An item found in a spot will be there again the next time you play UNLESS you
are still carrying that item  from  the last time you played. So, if you  found
a melon for example, and  are  about to quit for the day, EAT the melon, and it
will be there again the next  time  you play, and you can EAT it again.
> When DUELing somebody, compare  their BAD HOMBRE rating with yours. If theirs
is too much higher, you may want to re- consider. You can still  win if  theirs
if  somewhat  higher, as the  rating is only a rough approximation of the
combat ability and a generous amount of luck is involved. Also, the weapons
used are very important, but not in the BHR, as the program doesn't know
which weapon each player will choose.
> If 'Dusk  Approaches..', DO NOT start a fight with a tough  monster. If  time
runs out during the battle, your  stats will be saved in your current  weakened
condition, making you easy pickings for a duel. Also, when  you come  back, the
monster will be  there at its  original strength, but you will still have  your
combat hits from the last time you were there.
> When 'Dusk Approaches..', find a spot without any monsters, eat and drink  to
get your stats up. Your character  will be better prepared to defend himself in
case of a duel, and you will be in good shape when you return.
> As you go up in levels, the  monsters hit harder! To compensate, you get more
skillful in  the use of  your  shield.  ALWAYS have a spare shield then...
> Know your character! Study the School character file. Know what his good  and
bad weapon types are.
> ALL your stats  are  considered  when you are fighting or dueling!
> If you belong to a Guild, try to park your character  in your  guilds HQ when
you leave for the day. He/She will  get a duel  bonus if anybody attacks  while
you are gone.
> All items you find lying about can be sold at the Pawn shop.
> Do NOT be afraid to  FLEE a  monster! It is much better to run away and  live
to fight another day than to start over with zero experience points..
> READ books to increase your wisdom!
> If you should come across an  unconsc-ious player, use LOOT to see if he is
carrying any  valuable  items. You can  LOOT one such item per  session  (Civys
will not be allowed to stay in the shop if they loot that session).
> If you leave your  character  in  the dungeon, GIVE your most valuable  items
to your Allies if  possible.  Any items left with an Ally are safe from LOOT.
> The higher your percentage of shield  or armor, the better  the  chance  that
a monster will not slip by them.
> Allies with a ! after their names are 'elite' allies. They tend to be  more
loyal  than  other  allies, have  light armor  and will not attack you if you
refuse to give  them food  when you EAT or DRINK.
